---
layout: post
title:  "The Ornette Site"
date:   2016-02-29 16:53:50 -0500
tags: [design, projects]
excerpt: <b>A CSS challenge.</b> - <i>"My hope for these little blog posts is to document my process and hopefully be able to learn from it in retrospect when I do another portfolio."</i>
media-bgcolor: black
show-default-image: false
media: ../../../../assets/images/feat-media/ornette.jpg
alt-cover: ../../../../assets/images/blog/ornette.png
alt-class: cover img-width-75
buttons:

    - link: "https://rawgit.com/emilyeserven/testwebsites/master/ornette/original/index.html"
      text: "View Starter Project"
    - link: "https://rawgit.com/emilyeserven/testwebsites/master/ornette/index.html"
      text: "View Project with Styling"
    - link: "https://github.com/emilyeserven/testwebsites/tree/master/ornette"
      text: "See Source Code"
---

## Origin & Goals

This project was originally for an in-class assignment. We were provided with bare HTML and were to add CSS styling to it. Most students had this as their first exposure to a larger project involving CSS, and were able to see how flexible CSS is. I personally wanted to explore colors and CSS I don't typically use, since this project was not client-related.

## Development

This was developed without legacy browsers and mobile styling, since I wanted to just explore the CSS without much limitations.

## Design

Since most of my designs tend to use blue or another "cool" color, I decided to work with yellow and black as the primary colors for this assignment. I also used tilted headers with a typewriter-like font to evoke a more vintage style, despite the sectioning of the website being like a modern one.

In retrospect, I would have done some more tests with the placement of content relative to the "Track Listing" and "Personnel" headings.

## Nitpicky Improvements

* The units of measurement should have been relative (`em`) instead of just `px`.
* The black background of the "Ornette Coleman" main header is a different black than the rest of the top section.
* The copyright line at the last section doesn't have a font specified, and looks out of place from the rest.
* Increase line height for easier readability
* The link in the "Free Jazz" section should stand out more obviously as a link, perhaps adding a bold font weight would have improved scanability.

## In Conclusion...

Beginners don't realize how much of an impact CSS makes on the visual appeal and layout of their websites! By adding 153 lines of CSS, I was able to change a rather mundane page into a more stylistically interesting and easier to read experience.
